#
# pcp-htop(1) configuration file - see pcp-htop(5)
#

[filesystems]
heading = Filesystems
caption = Mounted block device filesystems

blockdev.heading = Device
blockdev.metric = filesys.mountdir
blockdev.instances = true
blockdev.width = -14

blocksize.heading = BSIZE
blocksize.metric = filesys.blocksize
blocksize.default = false

capacity.heading = SIZE
capacity.metric = filesys.capacity

used.heading = USED
used.metric = filesys.used

free.heading = FREE
free.metric = filesys.free
free.default = false

avail.heading = AVAIL
avail.metric = filesys.avail

full.heading = USE%
full.metric = filesys.full
full.format = percent

usedfiles.heading = USEDF
usedfiles.metric = filesys.usedfiles
usedfiles.default = false

freefiles.heading = FREEF
freefiles.metric = filesys.freefiles
freefiles.default = false

maxfiles.heading = MAXF
maxfiles.metric = filesys.maxfiles
maxfiles.default = false

mountdir.heading = Mount point
mountdir.metric = filesys.mountdir
mountdir.format = path
mountdir.width = -33
